blog: crash course in kubernetes part 2 (nodes) (#392)
windmilleng/tilt.build: blog/_posts/2020-1-23-crash-course-kubernetes-nodes.md

---
slug: crash-course-kubernetes-nodes
date: 2020-1-23
author: maia
layout: blog
title: "A Crash Course in Kubernetes #2: Nodes"
image: "featuredImage.png"

> image_needs_slug: true

Reviewer: please don't use `image_needs_slug` on new blog posts. It breaks some stuff but is necessary for backwards compatibility. Take a look at the more recent blog posts for how to do this properly

Author: 👍

  - docker
  - kubernetes
  - microservices
  - tilt
  - containers
keywords:
  - kubernetes
  - introduction
  - kubecontext
  - tilt
  - nodes
---
<script src="/assets/js/slideshow.js"></script>

Hello and welcome to our now slightly less-new blog post series, “A Crash Course on Kubernetes!” 

Our summer intern didn’t have a background in Kubernetes, so to get her up to speed, we started
giving internal Tilt University presentations on relevant concepts. This was a great crash
course for our intern, but even our experienced engineers learned things at these talks--turns
out, you can work within Kubernetes pretty effectively and still have large gaps in your
mental models.

We’re blogifying our Tilt U presentations so that other folks can benefit from the digging we did.
This is post #2 of the series, in which we talk about nodes, a.k.a "the things that hold the things
that run your app."

If you missed [Post 1: Overview](https://blog.tilt.dev/2019/10/16/crash-course-kubernetes
-overview.html), you might want to start there. Stay tuned for post #3, which will cover pods
(the things that actually run your app) and services (how pods talk to each other and the
outside world).

> ## What is a Node, and Why Should I Care?

Author: done

> In the above diagram, the blue squares are nodes. A node is just a machine (physical or virtual,

Author: lol did i not put that in, whoops?

it doesn’t matter) that runs some containers, and a Kubernetes process or two. There are two

> types of nodes: **worker nodes**, where your code runs, and the **master node**, which is in

Author: whoop. Added a footnote.

nodes work, and how pods are assigned to nodes, will help you figure out what’s going on. And
if things start to go wrong (“Unable to connect to the [API] server”), or if your `kubectl
apply` didn’t work like you expected it to, an accurate mental model of the master node and
all the machinery that runs your cluster will be a lifesaver.

### Wait, What’s a Pod?
Simply put, a pod is one unit of your app---say, a running instance of `shopping_cart_server`.
There’s a bit more to it than that, of course, but we’ll delve into the intricacies of pods in
the next post in this series. 

For the discussion of nodes, all you need to know is that a pod runs your app in a container,
and pods themselves are containers that run on nodes. 

## Anatomy of a Node
### Master Node
First we’ll talk about the master node. It’s called the “master node” because it’s in charge of everything.

In Kubernetes, you specify your configuration _declaratively_---you tell Kubernetes the desired
state of your cluster (number of instances of your app, which scaling method to use, how to set
up the networking) and Kubernetes makes it so. 

> The master node is how: it is both the means by which you specify your desired state, and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The master node is both the means by which you specify your desired state, and the
```

maybe I'm slow today but I read it like four times and couldn't convince myself it wasn't a typo (I did finally manage to parse it though)

> machinery for making sure that state is maintained.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
machinery for making sure the specified state is obtained.
```

or a different wording, but it's not just about preserving state, but transforming to new states

The desired cluster state lives on the master node in a datastore called **etcd**, [a consistent,

> highly-available key value store](https://etcd.io/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
highly available key-value store](https://etcd.io/). 
```

The master node runs a number of [**controllers**](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/).
For a given type of Kubernetes object, a controller: 
* Polls the cluster for state relating to that type; 
* Compares it to the desired state stored in etcd; and if needed,

> * Calls out to the **API server** to make any changes to the cluster. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Calls out to the **API server** (explained below) to make any changes to the cluster. 
```

maaaaybe? or maybe introduce it in a diagram above? but I think we should either, like, declare that it exists, or explicitly say we're gonna talk about it later and not to worry about it now

		<div class="slide" data-image="/assets/images/crash-course-kubernetes-nodes/slide8.png"></div>
		<div class="slide" data-image="/assets/images/crash-course-kubernetes-nodes/slide9.png"></div>
		<div class="slide" data-image="/assets/images/crash-course-kubernetes-nodes/slide10.png"></div>
	</div>
	<div class="slider-nav"><!-- "Previous" and "Next" actions -->
		<button class="slider-previous">Previous</button>
		<button class="slider-next">Next</button>
	</div>
</div>	

To read more about the above components, and all the other bits and pieces on the master node
that do important work, see [the Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/#master-components).

### Worker Node(s)
All the fine-grained control of the master node does no good if there’s nowhere for your apps to
run. That’s where worker nodes come in. Worker nodes are machines that run one or more pods
(i.e. units of your app).

If you’re connected to a Kubernetes cluster in the cloud, you’ll most likely run your pods across
multiple nodes. If you’re running Kubernetes locally (e.g. Docker Desktop, KinD, Minikube), you’ll

> be working with a single node, which is a VM running on your computer. Regardless of the number

Reviewer 2: maybe nitty, and I don't know how KinD or Minikube work, but my understanding is that with Docker Desktop on Mac, nodes are containers running inside a VM. I wouldn't be surprised if with KinD or Minikube on Linux, nodes are just containers, with no VM involved. I think I'd be surprised if there were a case where a node was just directly a VM itself.

Reviewer 3: IIRC minikube is a VM and kind is just containers

Author: yep, fixed

of worker nodes you have at your disposal, and whether they’re physical or virtual machines, the
basic anatomy is the same.

In addition to your pod(s), a worker node has some additional daemons that allow it to do its job:

* **Kubelet**: makes sure that the right containers are running on the right pods. It works a lot
like the controllers that live on the master node: the kubelet reads the state of all the pods
on its node, compares that against the desired state and, if there’s a discrepancy, makes the necessary changes
* **Kube-proxy**: proxies network traffic to/from pods (since pods aren’t themselves directly
connected to the network)

[Read more about worker nodes and their components here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/#node-components).

A worker node is only as good as the pods it’s running, so how does it figure out which pods to
run? This is where the pod scheduler, our last piece of master node machinery, comes in.

#### Scheduling: Putting Pods on Nodes
The **pod scheduler** on the master node watches for new pods that haven’t been assigned to

> nodes. These are pods that need creation, but we don’t yet know what computer they’re going to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nodes. These are pods that need creation, but we don’t yet know what node they’re going to
```

live on. For each of these pods, the pod scheduler finds the “best” node to put it on.

> First, it checks for _possible_ nodes, that is, those that have enough resources. With the list

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Then, with the list..."? It feels slightly awkward to have a "First, " and then nothing indicating we've moved onto "second"

I dunno, this whole paragraph feels weird:
* no motivation of why one should care about this
* it kinda felt like I was waiting for the "second," after the "first,", though that's obviously fixable
* the whole paragraph just kinda ends, without really connecting it to anything, which is then extra weird because it's basically the end of the blog post

Maybe that's kind of crappy feedback because I don't have a concrete suggestion, but I'm not sure if it'd be better to cut this paragraph or find a way to make it relevant, and don't have good ideas on how to make it relevant.

Author: good call, i moved this up and will add a better closer to this post

First we’ll talk about the master node. It’s called the “master node” because it’s in charge of everything.

In Kubernetes, you specify your configuration _declaratively_---you tell Kubernetes the desired
state of your cluster (number of instances of your app, which scaling method to use, how to set
up the networking) and Kubernetes makes it so. 

The master node contains both the means for specifying your desired state, and the machinery for
achieving and maintaining that state. Some bits of the master node that you should know about: 

![A(n incomplete) diagram of the master node's machinery](/assets/images/crash-course-kubernetes-nodes/master-node.png)
*A(n incomplete) diagram of the master node's machinery*

#### etcd: data storage
The desired cluster state lives on the master node in a datastore called **etcd**, [a consistent,
highly available key-value store](https://etcd.io/).

#### API Server: interacting with the cluster
The **API server** is the means by which the master node (and the user) makes changes to the cluster---it provides
endpoints for creating, configuring, and deleting just about anything in the cluster.

#### Pod Scheduler: assign pods to worker nodes

> The **pod scheduler** on watches for new pods that haven’t been assigned to nodes. These are pods

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The **pod scheduler** watches for new pods that haven’t been assigned to nodes. These are pods
```

Author: 😅
